Egypt attained Egypt first continuous peak of civilization.
Three so-called "Kingdom" periods mark the high points of civilization in the lower Nile Valley.
One would have been recognized by Ancient Egyptians.
The term itself was coined by eighteenth-century historians and the distinction between the Old Kingdom and the Early Dynastic Period is not one which would have been recognized by Ancient Egyptians.
Not only was the last king of the Early Dynastic Period related to the first two kings of the Old Kingdom, but the 'capital', the royal residence, remained at Ineb-Hedg, the Ancient Egyptian name for Memphis.
The basic justification for a separation between the two periods is the revolutionary change in architecture accompanied by the effects on Egyptian society and economy of large-scale building projects.
The Old Kingdom is most commonly regarded as the period from the Third Dynasty through to the Sixth Dynasty.
It is through the monuments and their inscriptions that scholars have been able to construct a history.
The 4th-6th Dynasties of Egypt, are scarce.
Historians regard the history of the era as literally 'written in stone' and largely architectural in that it is through the monuments and their inscriptions that scholars have been able to construct a history.
Egyptologists also include the Memphite Seventh and Eighth Dynasties in the Old Kingdom as a continuation of the administration centralized at Memphis.
While the Old Kingdom was a period of internal security and prosperity, it was followed by a period of disunity and relative cultural decline referred to by Egyptologists as the First Intermediate Period.
A living god ruled absolutely and could demand the services and wealth of his subjects.
During the Old Kingdom, the king of Egypt became a living god who ruled absolutely.
The king of Egypt could demand the services and wealth of his subjects.
Memphis where Djoser established his court.
Under King Djoser, the first king of the Third Dynasty of the Old Kingdom, the royal capital of Egypt was moved to Memphis, where Djoser established his court.
A new era of building was initiated at Saqqara under his reign.
King Djoser's architect, Imhotep is credited with the development of building with stone and with the conception of the new architectural form—the Step Pyramid.
The Old Kingdom is perhaps best known for the large number of pyramids constructed at this time as burial places for Egypt's kings.
For this reason, the Old Kingdom is frequently referred to as "the Age of the Pyramids.
The third dynasty ordered the construction of a pyramid in Memphis' necropolis, Saqqara.
The first Pharaoh of the Old Kingdom was Djoser of the third dynasty, who ordered the construction of a pyramid in Memphis' necropolis, Saqqara.
An important person during the reign of Djoser was An important person during the reign of Djoser vizier, Imhotep.
It was in this era that formerly independent ancient Egyptian states became known as nomes, under the rule of the Pharaoh.
The former rulers were forced to assume the role of governors.
The former rulers otherwise work in tax collection.
Egyptians in this era worshipped Egyptians in this era.
The annual flooding of the Nile was necessary for their crops.
Pharaoh as a god, believing that he ensured the annual flooding of the Nile that was necessary for their crops.
Egyptian views on the nature of time during this period held that the universe worked in cycles.
The Pharaoh on earth worked to ensure the stability of those cycles.
They also perceived They as a specially selected people.
The Fourth Dynasty began with Sneferu.
The Old Kingdom and its royal power reached a zenith under the Fourth Dynasty, which began with Sneferu.
After Djoser, Pharaoh Snefru was the next great pyramid builder.
Snefru commissioned the building of not one, but three pyramids.
The first is called the Meidum pyramid, named for its location in Egypt.
The outside casing fell off of the pyramid.
The Meidum pyramid was the first to have an above-ground burial chamber.
He used more stones than any other Pharaoh.
Using more stones than any other Pharaoh, he built the three pyramids: a now collapsed pyramid in Meidum, the Bent Pyramid at Dahshur, and the Red Pyramid, at North Dahshur.
However, the full development of the pyramid style of building was reached not at Saqqara, but during the building of 'The Great Pyramids' at Giza.
Khufu built the Great Pyramid of Giza.
Sneferu was succeeded by Sneferu son, Khufu, who built the Great Pyramid of Giza.
After Khufu's death, his sons Djedefra and Khafra may have quarrelled.
The latter built the second pyramid and the Sphinx in Giza.
Recent reexamination of evidence has led Egyptologist Vassil Dobrev to propose that the Sphinx had been built by Djedefra as a monument to his father Khufu.
Alternatively, the Sphinx has been proposed to be the work of Khafra and Khufu himself.
There were military expeditions into Canaan and Nubia, with Egyptian influence reaching up the Nile into what is today the Sudan.
King Menkaure, who built the smallest pyramid in Giza, Shepseskaf and, perhaps, Djedefptah built the smallest pyramid in Giza, Shepseskaf and, perhaps.
The later kings of the Fourth Dynasty were king Menkaure, who built the smallest pyramid in Giza, Shepseskaf and, perhaps, Djedefptah.
The Fifth Dynasty began with Userkaf.
The Fifth Dynasty was marked by the growing importance of the cult of sun god Ra.
Consequently, fewer efforts were devoted to the construction of pyramid complexes than during the 4th dynasty and more to the construction of sun temples in Abusir.
His son Sahure commanded an expedition to Punt.
Userkaf was succeeded by his son Sahure who commanded an expedition to Punt.
Neferirkare Kakai was Sahure's son.
Sahure was in turn succeeded by Neferirkare Kakai who was Sahure's son.
Neferirkare introduced the prenomen in the royal titulary.
Neferirkare was followed by two short-lived kings, his son Neferefre and Shepseskare, the latter of uncertain parentage.
A long lived pharaoh built extensively in Abusir and.
Shepseskare may have been deposed by Neferefre's brother Nyuserre Ini, a long lived pharaoh who built extensively in Abusir and re-started royal activity in Giza.
The last Pharaohs of the dynasty were Menkauhor Kaiu, Djedkare Isesi and Unas, the earliest ruler to have the pyramid texts inscribed in his pyramid.
Egypt's expanding interests in trade goods such as ebony, incense such as myrrh and frankincense, gold, copper and other useful metals inspired the ancient Egyptians to build suitable ships for navigation of the open sea.
Ship builders of that era did not use pegs or metal fasteners.
Ship builders of that era relied on rope to keep Ship builders of that era ships assembled.
Planks and the superstructure were tightly tied.
Planks and the superstructure bound together.
These charge created local dynasties largely independent from the central authority of the Pharaoh.
These no longer belonged to the royal family.
These charge became hereditary, thus creating local dynasties largely independent from the central authority of the Pharaoh.
Especially the canal to Lake Moeris around 2300 BC was likely also the source of water to the Giza pyramid complex centuries earlier.
However, Nile flood control was still the subject of very large works, including especially the canal to Lake Moeris around 2300 BC, which was likely also the source of water to the Giza pyramid complex centuries earlier.
His death, certainly well past that of his intended heirs, might have created succession struggles.
The country slipped into civil wars mere decades after the close of Pepi II's reign.
The 22nd century BC drought in the region resulted in a drastic drop in precipitation.
The final blow was the 22nd century BC drought in the region that resulted in a drastic drop in precipitation.
For at least some years between 2200 and 2150 BC, this prevented the normal flooding of the Nile.
Whatever its cause, the collapse of the Old Kingdom was followed by decades of famine and strife.
An important inscription on the tomb of Ankhtifi, a nomarch during the early First Intermediate Period, describes the pitiful state of the country when famine stalked the land.
Egypt's Old Kingdom was one of the most dynamic periods in the development of Egyptian art.
The first time images and forms endured for generations.
Artists created for the first time images and forms that endured for generations.
During this period, artists learned to express artists culture's worldview, creating for the first time images and forms that endured for generations.
Architects and masons mastered the techniques necessary to build monumental structures in stone.
Sculptors created the earliest portraits of individuals and the first lifesize statues in wood, copper, and stone.
Sculptors perfected the art of carving intricate relief decoration and, through keen observation of the natural world, produced detailed images of animals, plants, and even landscapes, recording the essential elements of their world for eternity in scenes painted.
Sculptors carved on the walls of temples and tombs.
These images and structures had two principal functions: to ensure an ordered existence.
These images and structures to defeat death by preserving life into the next world.
A formal artistic canon would define Egyptian art for more than 3,000 years, while remaining flexible enough to allow for subtle variation and innovation.
To these ends, over a period of time, Egyptian artists adopted a limited repertoire of standard types.
Egyptian artists established a formal artistic canon that would define Egyptian art for more than 3,000 years, while remaining flexible enough to allow for subtle variation and innovation.
Much of their artistic effort was centered on preserving life after death.
Although much of their artistic effort was centered on preserving life after death, Egyptians also surrounded Egyptians with objects to enhance their lives in this world, producing elegant jewelry, finely carved and inlaid furniture, and cosmetic vessels and implements made from a wide range of materials.